# Final Report 
* Carolina Santos Lages
* 1801214691
* Blockchain and Digital Currency 2018-19 Module 3 (Spring 2019)

## Digital currency and government: What are countries doing?

## 1 Fundamentals of digital currency and government

The first digital currency based on peer-to-peer authentication – Bitcoin –, known as distributed ledger technology (DLT), was conceived by Satoshi Nakamoto, and the paper explaining it was released in 2008 (Dwyer, 2014). It stated that “A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a financial institution.” The project can be considered a construction milestone for its mechanism that allows the transactions, and for the widespread usage of blockchain since then. 

This idea found breeding ground between the Cypherpunk, an online group of people who struggles for privacy under any circumstance, as well as between the libertarians, those who support a political line with maximum individual liberty and minimized government.

According to the [Cyberpunks](https://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html):
> We cannot expect governments, corporations, or other large, faceless organizations to grant us privacy out of their beneficence. It is to their advantage to speak of us, and we should expect that they will speak. To try to prevent their speech is to fight against the realities of information 

The same opinion is shared by [libertarians](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Libertarianism_in_the_United_States):
> They advocate a much smaller government; one that is limited to protecting individuals from coercion and violence. Libertarians tend to embrace individual responsibility, oppose government bureaucracy and taxes, promote private charity, tolerate diverse lifestyles, support the free market, and defend civil liberties. 

Since then, with no government influence or guidance, Bitcoins have been growing substantially and accounted for around 0.13% world`s money, in September 2018. Moreover, Bitcoins inspired the creation of other cryptocurrencies, and, together, they sum US$ 202 bi, as shown in the figure above:

Nevertheless, Bitcoin has failed on behaving as a currency that delivers the three fundamentals aspects of money: i) unit of account, ii) means of payment, and iii) store of value. An illustration of this failure is that even some of the blockchain enthusiasts (Initial Coin Offering - ICO[ https://icobench.com/ ]) are not willing to be fully sponsored with those coins due to its instability. That happens because of three deep and related problems: the extent of genuine activity is hugely exaggerated; the fraud may be endemic; and technology does not scale well. The main reason for the first problem is that bitcoins owners simply want prices to start rising again, inflating artificially its activity and importance. The fraud, on the other hand, includes ponzi schemes, hacking and collapse on the exchange process[ According to the Anti-Money Laundering Report, criminals stole $1.7 billion of cryptocurrency last year, 3.6 times higher than in 2017 (CipherTrace, 2019). A relevant question is: is this number high proportionally to the total amount of cryptocurrency? The total market cap is $178.859.392.910, last updated in Apr 19, 2019 8:20 AM UTC (https://coinmarketcap.com/all/views/all/), which means that around 0.95% was stolen.  And what is this proportion for the regular currencies, which are also subject to hackers? This is certainly a much more difficult question to answer – what is already a problem by itself –, raising doubt about the safer and more convenient currency.]. Finally, the third one is technical (considering the status quo): the creation of blocks each ten minutes limits the network to processing about seven transactions per second (just to compare, Visa can handle tens of thousands per second). Another criticism concerning the bitcoin is that it is energy-hungry, given its limit of 21 m Bitcoins. During its boom, the electricity consumed was equivalent of Ireland, and now it matches Romania consumption[ The provision of cash is also costly. The value is estimated to be 0.5% of GDP for the euro area, as well as Canada and Uruguay (Griffoli, 2018). Mexico estimates a cost of 3% of the GDP (Forbes, 03/27/2019). Roughly speaking, we could consider that the world spends between 0.5% to 3% of its GDP for issuing and managing cash, and that the amount of energy consumed by country is proportional to its GDP. This being said, Ireland and Romania’s GDP share of world (PPP) in 2015 were 0.227% and 0.365% (http://www.economywatch.com/economic-statistics/economic-indicators/GDP_Share_of_World_Total_PPP/). Moreover, Bitcoins are divisible by construction to the eighth digit after the decimal place, which allows for quite a bit of subdivision of units (Dwyer, 2014), much more than the current amount of money available estimated on US$ 86.5 t (https://howmuch.net/articles/worlds-money-in-perspective-2018). Apparently, the supply is enough to deliver the money’s functions of unit of account and means of payment, although inherently deflationary, and the energy required is reasonable, when compared to the current situation.]. (The Economist, 03/28/2019)

One contradiction[ https://medium.com/bosscrypto/the-great-bitcoin-contradiction-e03f0f268c54] raised in this context where bitcoins are more seen as an investment than unit of trade: nowadays big institutions control most bitcoins for speculation and intermediation, as well as miner[ Actually, the same happens with hackers. 60% of all hacks from exchanges and custodial services in 2018  (over $1 billion) were done by only two prominent professional groups. (CipherTrace, 2019)]. Does the market structure could be considered a monopoly, with the same characteristics attributed to the “financial institution” quoted and abhorred by Satoshi?

Finally, the motivation of this article is to analyses what are the usage of digital currency and DLT made by the government, the powers shaping it, and if it converges to Satoshi’s ideal. I believe digital currency guided by the government has the potential to reduce monopoly distortions, and operational risk, to be more cost efficiency, to provide financial inclusion, besides combating money laundering and tax evasion. It could, in the end, allow monetary integration and reduction of inequality, the biggest threat to the world. 
